# Constants

An integer constant like `1234` is an `int`

A `long` is notated with a terminating `L`, such as `123456789L`.
The `L` can be lower or upper case. An integer too large for an `int` will
be assumed to be a `long`. An unsigned constant will be terminated with a
`u` or `U`. `unsigned long`s will of course be terminated with `ul` or 
`UL`

Floating point values can be expressed with a decimal (`1.23`), an 
exponent (1e-2), or both. Their type is double unless suffixed with 
`l`/`L` for `long double` or `f`/`F` for `float`.

An integer can be expressed in octal or hexadecimal instead of decimal.
Octal is indicated by a leading '0' and a leading '0x' expresses 
hexadecimal.

> Decimal 31 can be expressed as `31`, `037`, and `0x1f`/`0X1F` in 
> decimal, octal, and hexadecimal respectively.

As with decimal representation, octal and hexadecimal can be appended by 
`u` and `l` for `unsigned` and `long`.

A _character constant_ is an integer expressed as a character between 
single quotes: `'c'`. The numeric value is the numeric value of the 
character in the machine's character set (such as ASCII).

Some characters can be represented in character and string constants using
escape characters. They are represented as `'\n'` and look like two 
characters but are only one. They can also be written in the format 
`_'\ooo'_` where _ooo_ is one to three octal digits (0...7) or by `'\xhh'`
where _hh_ is one or more hecadecimal digits (0...9, a...f, A...F).

We might write 
```C
#define	VTAB	'\013'	/* ASCII vertical tab */
#define	BELL	'\007'	/* ASCII bell character */
```
or in hexadecimal
```C
#define	VTAB	'\xb'	/* ASCII vertical tab */
#define	BELL	'\x7'	/* ASCII bell character */
```
The complete set of escape sequences are:
```
	\a	alert (bell)		\\	backslash
	\b	backspace		\?	question mark
	\f	formfeed		\"	double quote
	\n	newline			\_ooo_	octal number
	\r	carriage return		\_xhh_	hexadecimal number
	\v	vertical tab
```

The character constant `'\0'` is used to represent the character with the
value of zero, the null character. `'\0'` is often written instead of `0`
even though the value is 0 to indicate that it is a special-use character.

A _constant expression_ isj an expression using only constants. These are
evaluated at compile-time. These can occur anywhere a constant can appear.
```C
#define	MAXLINE	1000
char line[MAXLINE+1]
```

A _string constant_ is a sequence of zero or more characters surrounded by
quotes. String constants can be concatenated at compile time. `"hello, " 
"world"` is equivalent to `"hello, world"`.

The internal storage of strings contain the null character (\0) at the end
so the storage required for a string is one greater than the length.

The standard library function `strlen(s)` returns the length of its 
character string argument, not including `'\0'`. Here is an 
implementation:
```C
/* strlen: return length of s */
int strlen(char s[])
{
	int i;
	i = 0;
	while (s[i] != '\0')
		++i;
	return i;
}
```
`strlen` and other string functions are declared in the standard header 
`<string.h>`.

Be careful to distinguish between a character constant and a single
character string. `"x"` is  not the same as `'x'`. The second is an 
integer, the first is an array of one character and `'\0'`.

#### But wait! There's more

There is another kind of constant, the _enumeration constant_. An 
enumeration is a list of constant integer variables.
```C
enum boolean { NO, YES };
```
The first name in an `enum` has value 0, the next 1, and so on. Values can
be specified.
```C
enum escapes { BELL = '\a', BACKSPACE = '\b', TAB = '\t',
		NEWLINE = '\n', VTAB = '\v', RETURN = '\r' };
```
If not all values are given, the progression continues from the last 
specified value:
```C
enum numbers { ONE = 1, TWO, THREE, FOUR };
```
`TWO` has value 2, and `FOUR` has value 4. Names must be distinct, values
do not. `enum`s provide a convinent way to represent constant values,
similar to `#define`.
