# 1.5 Character Input and Output

The model of input and Output supported by the standard library is simple.
Text input boils down to streams of characters. A _text stream_ is a 
sequence of characters divided into lines; each line consists of zero or
more characters divided by newline characters.

The standard library provides a number of functions for reading one 
character at a time, of which `getchar` and `putchar` are the simplest.

Each time `getchar` is called, it reads the _next input character_ from
a text stream and returns its value.

`c = getchar()` sets c to the next character of input, usually from the
keyboard. `putchar(c)` prints the contents of the integer variable `c`
as a character, usually on the screen.

---

## 1.5.1 File Copying

A surprisingly large amount of useful programs can be written with no
more than `getchar` and `putchar`. 

```C
#include <stdio.h>

/* copy input to output, 1st version */
main()
{
	int c;

	c = getchar();
	while (c != EOF) {
		putchar(c);
		c = getchar();
	}
}
```

This isn't quite good enough. In C, any assignment, such as 
`c = getchar()` is an expression, and has a value, which in this case, is
`c`. That means an assignment can be part of a larger expression.

```C
#include <stdio.h>

/* copy input to output, 2nd version */
main()
{
	int c;

	while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
		putchar(c);
}
```

`c = getchar()` must be within parenthesis because `!=` has higher 
precedence than `=`. Without the parenthesis, `c = getchar() != EOF` is
equivalent to `c = (getchar() != EOF)`

## Excercises

1-6. Verify that the expression `getchar != EOF` is 1 or 0
	- see ex\_1-6 in `programs`
1-7. Write a program to print EOF
	- see ex\_1-7 in `programs`

---

## 1.5.2 Character Counting

And now for something completely different: A program to count characters.

```C
#include <stdio.h>

/* count characters in input; 1st version */
main()
{
	long nc;

	nc = 0;
	while (getchar() != EOF)
		++nc;
	printf("%ld\n", nc);
}
```

Why `long`? `int` has a maximum capacity of 32767 (on some machines).
to avoid overflow, we use `long`, which has much greater capacity.
Thus, we use `%ld` in `printf`.

We can use `double` for even greater amounts. Here's an example with 
`double` and `for`:

```C
#include <stdio.h>

/* count characters of input, 2nd version */
main()
{
	double nc;

	for (nc = 0; getchar() != EOF; ++nc)
		;
	printf("%.0f\n", nc);
}
```

All of the work here is done in the test and increment portions of the 
`for` loop. Since we need a body in the `for` loop, we use the _null
statement_, an isolated semicolon.

---

## 1.5.3 Line Counting

An input line counter:

```C
#include <stdio.h>

/* count lines of input */
main(){
	int c, nl;

	nl = 0;
	while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
		if (c == '\n')
			++nl;
	printf("%d\n", nl);
}
```

## Excercises
1-8. Write a program to count blanks, newlines, tabs
	- see ex\_1-8 in `programs`
1-9. Write a program to copy input to output, replacing multiple blanks 
with a single blank.
	- see ex\_1-9 in `programs`
1-10. Write a program to copy input to output, replacing tabs with \t,
backspaces with \b, and backslashes with \\
	- see ex\_1-10 in `programs`

---

## 1.5.4 Word Counting

```C
#include <stdio.h>

#define	IN	1	/* inside a word */
#define	OUT	0	/* outside a word */

/* count lines, words, and characters in input */
main()
{
	int c, nl, nw, nc, state;

	state = OUT;
	nl = nw = nc = 0;
	while ((c = getchar()) != EOF) {
		++nc;
		if(c == '\n')
			++nl;
		if (c == ' ' || c == '\n' || c = '\t')
			state = OUT;
		else if (state == OUT) {
			state = IN;
			++nw;
		}
	}
	printf("%d %d %d\n", nl, nw, nc);
}
```

The variable initialization `a = b = c = 0` is equivalent to
`a = ( b = (c = 0))`, and sets all to 0.

##Excercises
1-11. How would you test the word count program? What kind of input are
most likely to uncover bugs?
	- I would test a standard case (a simple sentance that I can
	count by hand) and edge cases (empty string, one word, leading
	and trailing spaces etc.). The types of input to uncover bugs
	are the kinds the program author wouldn't have thought of.
1-12. Write a program that prints input one word per line
	- see ex\_1-12 in `programs`
