# Functions

> A function provides a convenient way to encapsulate some computation

With properly designed functions, it's possible to ignore _how_ a job is
done...knowing _what_ is done is sufficient.

C Makes the use of functions easy, convenient, and efficient. "You will 
often see a short function defined and called only once, just because it 
clarifies some piece of code"

We've only used a couple functions (`putchar`, `getchar`, `printf`) that 
have been provided for us. Now, we can write a few of our own.

---

Since C has no exponentiation operater like `**`, we can write a sample
function `power(m, n)` that raises an integer `m` to the power of a 
positive integer `n`. (the standard library contains a function 
`pow(x, y)` that computes x^y.

```C
#include <stdio.h>

int power(int m, int n);

/* test power function */
main()
{
	int i;
	for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
		printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2, i), power(-3, i));
	return 0;
}
```

```C
/* power: raise base to n-th power; n >= 0 */
int power(int base, int n)
{
	int i, p;

	p = 1;
	for (i = 1; i <= n; ++i)
		p = p * base;
	return p;
}
```

A function takes the form:

>return-type function-name(paramater declarations(if any))
>{
>	declarations
>	statements
>}

Function definitions can appear in any order, and in one source file or
several. If the source program appears in several files, you may have to
say more to compile and load it than if it all appears in one. For the 
moment, we will assume that both functions are in the same file

The first line of `power` declares the parameter types and names, as well
as the type of the result the function returns.

_parameter_: a variable named in the parenthesized list in a function 
definition

_argument_: a value used in the call of the function

The value that `power` computes is returned to `main` by the `return` 
statement. Any expression may follow `return`.

A function does not need to return a value. A `return` with no expression
returns control, but no useful value. This can also be achieved by 
"falling off the end", when a final curly brace is reached without a 
return statement.

Previously, main functions haven't returned a value for simplicity's sake.
From now on, main functions will return a value (0 for success, non-0 for
unusual or erroneous termination).

The declaration
```C
int power(int m, int n);
```
says that power is a function that expects two arguments and returns an 
int. This is called a _function prototype_ and has to agree with the 
definition and uses of power. Parameter names don't have to agree. They
don't even need names:
```C
int power(int, int);
```
is perfectly acceptable. 
However, well chosen names are good documentation, so we will use them.

## Excercises 
1-15: Rewrite the temp conversion program of Section 1.2 to use a function
for conversion
	- see ex\_1-13 in `programs`
