# Character Arrays

The most common type of array in C is the character array. To illustrate
their use, we will write a program that reads a set of text lines and 
print the longest. The out line is simple enough:

```
while (there's another line)
    if (it's longer than the prevoius longest)
        save it
        save its length
print longest line
```

The outline shows that the program divides naturally into pieces. One 
piece gets a line, another saves it, and the rest controlls the process.
Since things divide so nicely, it would do well to write them that way.
Accordingly, we will write a separate function `getline` to fetch the next
line of input.

We will try to make the function useful in other contexts; at minimum, 
`getline` must return a signal about possible end of file--a more useful
design would be to return the length of the line, or zero if EOF. Zero is
an acceptable EOF indicator because zero is never a valid line length.

When we file a line that is longer than the previous longest line, it must
be saved somewhere. This suggests a second function, `copy`, to copy the
new line to a safe place.

Finally, we need a main program to control `getline` and `copy`.

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#define MAXLINE 1000	/* maximum input line size */

int getline(char line[], int maxline);
void copy(char to[], char from[]);

/* print longest input line */
main()
{
	int len;	/* current line length */
	int max;	/* maximum line length seen so far */
	char line[MAXLINE];	/* current input line */
	char longest[MAXLINE};	/* longest line saved here */
	
	max = 0;
	while((len = getline(line, MAXLINE)) > 0)
		if (len > max){
			max = len;
			copy(longest, line);
		}
	if (max > 0)	/* there was a line */
		printf("%s", longest);
	return 0;
}

/* getline: read a line into s, return length */
int getline(char s[], int lim)
{
	int c, i;

	for (i=0; i<lim-1 && (c=getchar())!=EOF && c!='\n'; ++i)
		s[i] = c;
	if (c == '/n') {
		s[i] = c;
		++i;
	}
	s[i] = '\0';
	return i;
}

/* copy: copy 'from' into 'to'; assume 'to' is big enough */
void copy(char to[], char from[])
{
	int i;

	i = 0;
	while ((to[i] = from[i]) != '\0')
		++i;
}
```

The functions `getline` and `copy` are defined at the beginning of the 
program, which we assume is contained within one file.

`main` and `getline` communicate through a pair of arguments and a 
returned value. In `getline`, the arguments are declared by the line
```C
int getline(char s[], int lim)
```
which specifies that the first argument, `s`, is an array, and the second,
`lim`, is an integer. The purpose of specifying the size of an array is to
set aside storage.

`getline` puts the character '\0' (the null character) at the end of the 
array to indicate the end of a string. This convention is also used by C:
when a string constant like `"hello\n"` appears in a C program, it is 
stored as an array of characters containing the characters of the string
terminated with a '\0' at the end: | h | e | l | l | o | \n | \0 |

The `%s` format specification in `printf` expects the corresponding 
argument to be a string represented in this form. `copy` also relies on
the fact that its input argument is terminated by '\0', and it copies this
character into the output argument. (all of this implies that '\0' is not
a part of normal text).

Even a program as small as this one raises some problems. e.g., what 
should happen when `main` encounters a line longer than its limit?

There is no way a user of `getline` can know in advance how long a line
will be, so `getline` checks for overflow.

## Exercises

- 1-16. Revise the main routine of the longest-line program so that it will
correctly print the length of arbitrarily long input lines, and as much as
possible of the text.
	- see ex\_1-16 in `programs`
- 1-17. Write a program to print all input lines longer than 80 chars
	- see ex\_1-17 in `programs`
- 1-18. Write a program to remove trailing blanks and tabs from each line of
input, and delete blank lines
	- see ex\_1-18 in `programs`
- 1-19. Write a function `reverse(s)` that reverses the character string `s`.
Use it to write a program to reverse input one line at a time.
	- see ex\_1-19 in `programs`
