# External Variables and Scope

The variables in `main` are local to `main`. Because they were declared in
`main`, no other function can have direct access to them. The same is true
in other functions. Each local variable comes into existance when the
function is called, and dissapears when the function is exited. This is why
such variables are called _automatic variables_.

As an alternative to automatic variables, it is possible to define 
variables that are _external_ to all functions, that is, variables that can
be accessed by the same name by any function. Because external variables
are globally accessible, they can be used instead of argument lists to 
communicate data between functions. Furthermore, global variables retain
their values, even after functions that set them have returned.

An external variable must be _defined_, exactly once, outside of any 
functions; this sets aside storage for it.. The variable must also be 
declared in each function that wants access to it; this states the type of
variable. 

>The declaration may be an explicit `extern` statement, or may be implicit
>from context. 

To make the discussion concrete, let us rewrite the longest-line program
with `line`, `longest`, and `max` as external variables.

```C
#include <stdio.h>

#define	MAXLINE	1000	/* maximum input line size */

int max;		/* maximum length seen so far */
char line[MAXLINE];	/* current input line */
char longest[MAXLINE];	/* longest line saved here */

int getline(void);
void copy(void);

/* print longest input line; specialized version */
main()
{
	int len;
	extern int max;
	extern char longest[];

	max = 0;
	while ((len = getline()) > 0)
		if (len > max) {
			max = len;
			copy();
		}
	if (max > 0)	/* there was a line */
		printf("%s", longest);
	return 0;
}

/* getline: specialized version */
int getline(void)
{
	int c, i;
	extern char line[];

	for (i=0; i<MAXLINE-1 && (c=getchar())!=EOF && c!='\n'; ++i)
		line[i] = c;
	if (c == '\n') {
		line[i] = c;
		++i;
	}
	line[i] = '\0';
	return i;
}

/* copy: specialized version */
void copy(void)
{
	int i;
	extern char line[], longest[];

	i = 0;
	while ((longest[i] = line[i]) != '\0')
		++i;
}
```

The external variables in `main`, `getline`, and `copy` are defined by the
first lines of the above example, which set their type and cause storage to
be allocated for them. Before a function can use an external variable, its
name must be made known to the function, through the use of the `extern`
keyword. 

It is common to make all `extern` declarations at the beginning of the 
file, making `extern` statements in functions unnecessary.

Common practice dictates putting all external variables and functions in a
single file, known as _header files_, included through the use of 
`#include` at the beginning of every file. The suffix `.h` is convention
for header file names.

The specialized versions of `getline` and `copy` take no arguments, so
their arguments contain `void`. This will be discussed in Chapter 4.

Note the distinction between _definition_ and _declarations_.

>_definition_: the place where the variable is created or assigned 
>storage

>_declaration_: places where the nature of the variable is stated but no 
>storage is allocated

# Excercises

1-20. Write a program `detab` that replaces tabs in the input with the 
proper number of blanks ut space to the next tab stop. Assume a fixed 
number of tab stops, say every _n_ lines.
	- see ex\_1-20 in `programs`
1-21. Write a program `entab` to replace strings of blanks with the 
minimum number of tabs and blanks to acheive the same spacing.
	- see ex\_1-21 in `programs`
1-22. Write a program to fold long lines into two or more shorter lines
after the the last non-blank character to occur before the _n_th character
of input. Make sure your program does something intelligent with very long
lines and if there are no blank characters before the limit.
	- see ex\_1-22 in `programs`
1-23. Write a program to remove the comments from a C program
	- see ex\_1-23 in `programs`
1-24. Write a program to check for rudimentary syntax errors such as 
unbalanced parenthesis, quotes, brackets
	- see ex\_1-24 in `programs`
